Add conda env page (#912)
ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au: docs/getting_started/environments.md

{% set release_notes = "https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-nri-analysis3-conda-environments-new-release-announcement/4377" %}

<div class="text-card-group" markdown>
[:notepad_spiral:{: class="twemoji icon-before-text"} Release notes]({{release_notes}}){: class="text-card"}
</div>

# _conda/analysis3_ Python Environment

!!! danger
    All users are advised to [update their workflows](#update-workflows) to replace the `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment with the `xp65` `conda/analysis3` environment as soon as possible to ensure continued support and access to the latest features. The `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment is no longer actively maintained and, **after 30 May 2025**, the `hh5` project may be taken down without prior notice.
   

> ACCESS-NRI now supports and maintains the `conda/analysis3` _Python_ environment, housed within the [xp65 NCI project](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/xp65/join). This environment includes _Python_ libraries commonly used for climate data processing and analysis, allowing users to run workflows on _Gadi_ without having to manage package installations themselves. This is the continuation of the environment formerly maintained by CLEX within the `hh5` NCI project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ACCESS-NRI now supports and maintains the `conda/analysis3` _Python_ environment, housed within the [xp65 NCI project](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/xp65/join). This environment includes _Python_ libraries commonly used for climate data processing and analysis, allowing users to run workflows on _Gadi_ without having to manage package installations themselves. This is the continuation of the environments formerly maintained by CLEX within the `hh5` NCI project. [^1]

[^1]:
    These environments, developed and maintained by the CLEX CMS team, have proven very valuable to the community over the years. We again applaud and thank the CMS team for implementing this very successful service and supporting it for the whole community. 
```

Reviewer 2: I suggested to wrap the acknowledgments section in an "Acknowledgments" paragraph (i think it makes it clearer).

With that, instead of referencing it the way you're suggesting, we might directly link the paragraph. Something like:

```
This is the continuation of the environments formerly [maintained by CLEX](#acknowledgements) within the `hh5` NCI project.
```

Author: ```suggestion
ACCESS-NRI now supports and maintains the `conda/analysis3` _Python_ environment, housed within the [xp65 NCI project](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/xp65/join). This environment includes _Python_ libraries commonly used for climate data processing and analysis, allowing users to run workflows on _Gadi_ without having to manage package installations themselves. This is the continuation of the environments formerly [maintained by CLEX](#acknowledgements) within the `hh5` NCI project.
```

    You can then manually invoke the alias whenever needed.<br>
    For example, you can add the following line to your `.bashrc` or `.bash_profile` file:
    ```sh
    alias analysis3='module use /g/data/xp65/public/modules && module load conda/analysis3'
    ```
    Then, within any session, you can simply run `analysis3` to load the environment.

### Use the environment within a PBS job  {: #use-the-environment-within-a-pbs-job }
In a [PBS job submission script](https://opus.nci.org.au/spaces/Help/pages/90308778/0.+Welcome+to+Gadi#id-0.WelcometoGadi-SubmissionScriptExample) (including for usage with rose/cylc), in addition to adding the two `module use` and `module load` lines above, add `gdata/xp65` to your storage flag:
```
#PBS -l storage=gdata/xp65
```
!!! tip
    Multiple storage projects are separated by a plus (`+`): 
    ```
    #PBS -l storage=scratch/tm70+gdata/xp65
    ```

### Use the environment within ARE  {: #use-the-environment-within-are }
<div class="tabLabels" label="are">

>     <button id="are-vdi">ARE JupyterLab</button>
>     <button id="are-jupyterlab">ARE VDI</button>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <button id="are-jupyterlab">ARE JupyterLab</button>
    <button id="are-vdi">ARE VDI</button>
```
My bad, I had them switched over.

#### Command line and PBS 

When [manually loading the environment from the command line](#manually-load-the-environment) or [within a PBS job](#use-the-environment-within-a-pbs-job), you can load a particular version by explicitly specifying its release year and month (e.g., to load the April 2025 environment, specify `conda/analysis3-25.04`).<br>
If you do not specify a version (e.g. using `conda/analysis3` rather than `conda/analysis3-YY.MM`) the latest frozen (the previous month's) environment version will be loaded.<br>

!!! note 
    For rose/cylc, it is not recommended to specify a particular version of the environment (i.e. use `conda/analysis3` and not `conda/analysis3-YY.MM`).

#### ARE

When launching an [ARE Jupyterlab session](#are-jupyterlab), you need only include `conda/analysis3`. If you would like to specify a particular environment version, you can do so for each notebook by switching kernels inside the ARE instance.

!!! tip
    The same version naming structure can be applied to the `conda/analysis3-edge` environment.

> _These environments, developed and maintained by the CLEX CMS team, have proven very valuable to the community over the years. We again applaud and thank the CMS team for implementing this very successful service and supporting it for the whole community._ 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Acknowledgements
The `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environments, developed and maintained by the CLEX CMS team, have proven very valuable to the community over the years. We sincerely thank the CMS team for implementing this very successful service and supporting it for the whole community.
```

Author: ```suggestion
## Acknowledgements {: #acknowledgements }

These environments, developed and maintained by the CLEX CMS team, have proven very valuable to the community over the years. We again applaud and thank the CMS team for implementing this very successful service and supporting it for the whole community.
```

Reviewer 2: The custom ID on the paragraph is not needed, mkdocs automatically sets the paragraph ID to the one you specified in this case.

I would remove "again".
I am not a fan of "applaud", but feel free to keep as is.

Author: Updating locally, as I can't seem to create a suggestion here

> # Conda Python Environment: `conda/analysis3`

Reviewer: The heading is perhaps very general in terms of context covered (for `xp65`). May be we can change the heading to be more specific to xp65. Just a brain dump - **"How to use xp65 in `condo/analysis3` environment?"**

Author: If we move this into, eg, the "How to set up your NCI account", then I agree @KAUR1984! If we leave as its own category under "Getting Started", then I think it might be best to leave it a bit broader, in case we add more content later.

> ACCESS-NRI supports the Python environment `conda/analysis3` that is housed in the NCI project xp65. More detailed information about the conda environment and how to use it will be added soon.

Reviewer: I would extract the sentence "More detailed information about the conda...", and put it in a note bubble, since it would be more prominent that way.

> 

Reviewer: I am a still a bit unsure about how it will fit in the overall flow of `Getting started with NCI` page. The page starts with:

1. Create an NCI user account
2. Join relevant NCI projects.
3. Login to Gadi
4. Change default project on Gadi. 
5. **Conda python environments for xp65**.  

I wish if we had a blog section on Hive Docs for adding blogs for new releases ;) (which later would be converted to more polished docs). 

If we were to do this again in the future, I would suggest having **General setup instructions for conda environments** on Hive Docs, with specific examples (like xp65) within it. When we announce new release, we would link to Hive Docs (for detailed context), but all specific actions needed by the user should just be in email/forum announcement.

Reviewer: Thanks @atteggiani ! These comments were on the first draft of the page :)

> This environment was formerly maintained by CLEX on project hh5. All users should update their workflows to use the xp65 environment that will be regularly maintained and updated by ACCESS-NRI.

Reviewer: Great start with the introduction! 
- May be elaborate a bit more on the background of the project and one-line introduction for `conda/analysis3` environment. 

- Could hyperlink these terms with detailed definitions.
- I see an action here - `"All users should update..."`, may be we can make it a bit bold as an action item?

## How to update your workflows to use the xp65 `conda/analysis3` environment

> **The only usage difference is to replace instances of `hh5` with `xp65`.** By not specifying a date (e.g. using `conda/analysis3` rather than `conda/analysis3-YY.MM`), the current month’s environment will be loaded. Examples of loading the new `conda/analysis3` environment include:

Reviewer: I think first line could be removed. We are explaining "how to include xp65", so we are good to not mention `hh5` in the first line.

Reviewer: I would perhaps start the roughly with: 
> There are three main ways to load `xp65` into your new conda/analysis3 environment:
> 1. **Command line** 
        >>>> Instructions
        
> 2. **For PBS job**
        >>>> Instructions
        
> 3. **ARE**
        >>>> Instructions

Author: Good idea - I did something very similar, but I should streamline the wording as you suggest!

> - On the **command line**, for each new session, run:

Reviewer: A newline character needed before this line.

```bash
module use /g/data/xp65/public/modules
module load conda/analysis3
```
- If you need to use the `conda/analysis3` environment for a **PBS job**, add the `xp65` project (or replace `hh5` with `xp65`) to your storage flags:
```
#PBS -l storage=gdata/xp65
```
- When using **Australian Research Environment (ARE)**, add `gdata/xp65` to "Storage", `/g/data/xp65/public/modules/` to "Module directories" (under "Advanced options"), and add `conda/analysis3` to "Modules". Additionally, users can switch kernels inside their **ARE JupyterLab instance** to select the appropriate environment.

> > Note that if you previously added the hh5 conda environment to your `.bashrc` file, we recommend that you **remove those lines** rather than replacing with xp65, as this can have some unforeseen interference with other processes you might run on Gadi. We suggest instead that you explicitly load the environment for each new session (the first bullet point above).

Reviewer: We can add links to Romain's announcement (later) at the bottom.

Reviewer: Can add more relevant links to documentation under the `references` section if needed.

Author: Good idea - we can link to his Forum post for more information about differences between the hh5 and xp65 environments. And possibly other links too.

Reviewer 2: I would add the release notes links also at the top (similarly to how it's done in the "[How to run ... pages](https://access-hive.org.au/models/run-a-model/run-access-ram/)")

Reviewer 2: Also, on the specific text: I can understand for many users to be bothersome having to (remember and) manually load the modules every time. 
I would then advise to create a function within the `.bashrc` (instead of directly running the commands), so they can manually run the commands by running the custom function (this is how I do it).

> > Note that if you previously added the hh5 conda environment to your `.bashrc` file, we recommend that you **remove those lines** rather than replacing with xp65, as this can have some unforeseen interference with other processes you might run on Gadi. We suggest instead that you explicitly load the environment for each new session (the first bullet point above).

Reviewer: In this note at the last, I could perhaps include some context of replacing hh5 with xp65 (rather than in the introduction) :)

# Conda Python Environment: `conda/analysis3`

ACCESS-NRI supports and maintains the Python environment `conda/analysis3` that is housed in the NCI project `xp65`. This environment includes most of the standard Python processing libraries for climate researchers in Australia.

!!! info

>     More detailed information about the conda environment and how to use it will be added soon.

Author: Agreed, this has been deleted

!!! warning 
    This environment was formerly maintained by CLEX on project hh5. All users should update their workflows to use the `xp65` environment **by 30 May 2025**. After this date, ACCESS-NRI cannot guarantee functionality of the `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment.

> ## How to update your workflows to use the xp65 `conda/analysis3` environment

Author: Because the instructions to use the new environment and update the new environment are almost identical, I've made a choice to not repeat them. Instead, I have a "note" box that informs users how to switch from the `hh5` to the `xp65` environment, but the instructions are geared toward just using the new environment.

See the updated preview and you can let me know what you think.

**The only usage difference is to replace instances of `hh5` with `xp65`.**  There are several ways in which you may need to update your workflow.

1. On the **command line**, for each new session, run:
```bash
module use /g/data/xp65/public/modules
module load conda/analysis3
```

> 2. To use the `conda/analysis3` environment for a **PBS job**, add the `xp65` project (or replace `hh5` with `xp65`) to your storage flags:

Author: I now have just "PBS jobs" as a header for the bullet point, and haven't included a link. If we do want to link to PBS documentation, we probably should do that for ARE too. Since this is just about using a conda environment, I don't think we need to include these links, but happy to if that's the preference.

```
#PBS -l storage=gdata/xp65
```
3. When laucnhing a JupyterLab instance through the Australian Research Environment (ARE):
  - Under "Storage", add  `gdata/xp65`. If you have other storage locations, use a "+" to add `xp65`: `+gdata/xp65`
  - Under "Advanced options":
    - In "Module directories", add `/g/data/xp65/public/modules/`
    - In "Modules", add `conda/analysis3`

> Note that if you previously added the hh5 conda environment to your `.bashrc` file, we recommend that you **remove those lines** rather than replacing with xp65, as this can have some unforeseen interference with other processes you might run on Gadi. We suggest instead that you explicitly load the environment for each new session (the first bullet point above).

> ## Specifying a particular environment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Load a specific environment version
```

We are releasing two parallel series of environments:

1. analysis3-YY.MM – A stable environment designed for long-term usability with well-tested, reliable package versions.
2. analysis3-edge-YY.MM – A cutting-edge environment with the latest available packages, ideal for those needing the most up-to-date software and features.

These series offer flexibility: use analysis3 for stability, or analysis3-edge for the latest updates.

> By not specifying a date (e.g. using `conda/analysis3` rather than `conda/analysis3-YY.MM`), the current month’s environment will be loaded. When using ARE, users can choose a specific environment for each notebook by switching kernels inside their ARE JupyterLab instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By not specifying a version (e.g. using `conda/analysis3` rather than `conda/analysis3-YY.MM`), the latest version will be loaded.

!!! tip
    When using ARE JupyterLab, users can choose a specific environment version for each notebook by switching kernels inside their ARE JupyterLab instance.
```

{% set release_notes = "https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-nri-analysis3-conda-environments-new-release-announcement/4377" %}

<div class="text-card-group" markdown>
[:notepad_spiral:{: class="twemoji icon-before-text"} Release notes]({{release_notes}}){: class="text-card"}
</div>

# `conda/analysis3` Python Environment

> ACCESS-NRI now supports and maintains the `conda/analysis3` Python environment, housed within the `xp65` NCI project. This environment includes _Python_ libraries commonly used for climate data processing and analysis. This environment allows users to run workflows on Gadi without having to manage package installations themselves. This environment was formerly maintained by CLEX within the `hh5` NCI project.

Author: You're right that it's not quite the same from a technical standpoint, but for users it is practically the same (a python environment with useful packages that regularly gets updated). Also, I don't like the word "homonymous". I don't think enough people would know what it means (I wasn't even sure at first 😅).

So I would suggest something like this.

```suggestion
ACCESS-NRI now supports and maintains the `conda/analysis3` _Python_ environment, housed within the [xp65 NCI project](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/xp65/join). This environment includes _Python_ libraries commonly used for climate data processing and analysis, allowing users to run workflows on _Gadi_ without having to manage package installations themselves. This is the continuation of the environment formerly maintained by CLEX within the `hh5` NCI project.
```

> ACCESS-NRI now supports and maintains the `conda/analysis3` Python environment, housed within the `xp65` NCI project. This environment includes _Python_ libraries commonly used for climate data processing and analysis. This environment allows users to run workflows on Gadi without having to manage package installations themselves. This environment was formerly maintained by CLEX within the `hh5` NCI project.

Reviewer 2: Sounds great!

!!! warning 

>     All users are advised to [update their workflows](#update-workflows) to replace the `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment with the `xp65` `conda/analysis3` environment **by 30 May 2025**. After this date, ACCESS-NRI cannot guarantee functionality of the `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment.

Author: I like both of your suggestions! I'll update on my local clone after responding to the rest of your comments.

## How to use the `xp65` `conda/analysis3` environment {: #update-workflows }
 There are 3 main ways in which you may want to load the `conda/analysis3` environment.

!!! note
    To update your workflow from the previous `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment, follow the steps below. **The only usage difference is to replace instances of `hh5` with `xp65`.**

1. **Command line**  
  For each new session, run:
  ```
  module use /g/data/xp65/public/modules
  module load conda/analysis3
  ```
2. **PBS jobs**  
  Add the `xp65` project to your storage flags:
```
#PBS -l storage=gdata/xp65
```
3. **Australian Research Environment (ARE)**  

>   When launching a JupyterLab or Virtual Desktop instance:
>     * Under "Storage", add  `gdata/xp65`. If you have other storage locations, use a "+" to add `xp65`: `+gdata/xp65`
>     * Under "Advanced options":
>         * In "Module directories", add `/g/data/xp65/public/modules/`
>         * In "Modules", add `conda/analysis3`

Reviewer 2: Here [content tabs (see "Tabs")](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au?tab=readme-ov-file#htmlmarkdown-cheatsheet-for-the-hive-docs) seem like a good option to differentiate between ARE VDI and Jupyter:

```suggestion
<div class="tabLabels" label="are">
    <button id="are-vdi">ARE VDI</button>
    <button id="are-jupyterlab">ARE JupyterLab</button>
</div>
<div tabcontentfor='are-vdi' markdown>
When launching an [ARE VDI](/getting_started/are/#vdi) instance:

1. Under "Storage", add  `gdata/xp65`. If you have other storage locations, use a plus sign (`+`) (e.g., `+gdata/xp65`).
</div>
<div tabcontentfor='are-jupyter' markdown>
When launching an [ARE JupyterLab](/getting_started/are/#jupyterlab) instance, under [Advanced options](/getting_started/are/#advanced-options):

1. In "Module directories", add `/g/data/xp65/public/modules/`
2. In "Modules", add `conda/analysis3`
</div>
```

Reviewer 2: OH yes you are right, the updated suggestion should be:
```suggestion
<div class="tabLabels" label="are">
    <button id="are-vdi">ARE VDI</button>
    <button id="are-jupyterlab">ARE JupyterLab</button>
</div>
When launching an <span tabcontentfor='are-vdi' markdown>[ARE VDI](/getting_started/are/#vdi)</span><span tabcontentfor='are-jupyter' markdown>[ARE JupyterLab](/getting_started/are/#jupyterlab)</span> instance:

1. Under "Storage", add  `gdata/xp65`. If you have other storage locations, use a plus sign (`+`) (e.g., `+gdata/xp65`).
<div tabcontentfor='are-jupyter' markdown>
2. Under [Advanced options](/getting_started/are/#advanced-options):
    - In "Module directories", add `/g/data/xp65/public/modules/`
    - In "Modules", add `conda/analysis3`
</div>
```

> !!! tip
>     If you previously added the `hh5` conda environment to your `.bashrc` or `.bash_profile` file, we recommend that you **completely remove those lines**, as programmatically loading environments that way might lead to unforeseen interference with other processes on _Gadi_. We suggest instead that you for each new session by following the instructions for the Command line above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
!!! tip
    If you loaded the `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment within your `.bashrc` or `.bash_profile` files, we recommend that you **completely remove those lines**, as programmatically loading environments that way might lead to unforeseen interference with other processes on _Gadi_. We suggest instead that you [manually load the environment](#manually-load-the-environment).
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## How to switch from the _hh5_ _conda/analysis3_ environment to the _xp65_ _conda/analysis3_ one {: #update-workflows }
If you have workflows that use the `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment, follow the steps below to update them to use the `xp65` `conda/analysis3` environment instead:
1. **Replace all instances of `hh5` with `xp65`**
2. **Make sure you are loading a correct version**<br>
   The  `xp65` `conda/analysis3` environment versioning might differ from the old `hh5` `conda/analysis3` one. Therefore, if you were loading a specific version (e.g., `conda/analysis3-23.10`), make sure to [specify a valid version](#load-a-specific-environment-version) for the `xp65` `conda/analysis3` environment.
```

> ## For more advanced usage

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Advanced usage
```

### Two Series of Environments: analysis3 and analysis3-edge

> We are releasing two parallel series of environments:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two parallel series of environments:
```

> 1. `analysis3-YY.MM` – A stable environment designed for long-term usability with well-tested, reliable package versions.
> 2. `analysis3-edge-YY.MM` – A cutting-edge environment with the latest available packages, ideal for those needing the most up-to-date software and features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **_conda/analysis3_**<br>
    A stable environment designed for long-term usability with well-tested, reliable package versions.
- **_conda/analysis3_**<br>
    A cutting-edge environment with the latest available packages, ideal for those needing the most up-to-date software and features.
```

Author: ```suggestion
- **_conda/analysis3_**<br>
    A stable environment designed for long-term usability with well-tested, reliable package versions.
- **_conda/analysis3-edge_**<br>
    A cutting-edge environment with the latest available packages, ideal for those needing the most up-to-date software and features.
```

Reviewer 2: I this just a copy of my suggestion? Sorry I might not be understanding it.

Author: Yours forgot the "edge". 😉 (Sorry, should have commented to explain that!)

Reviewer 2: Aaah right! I couldn't spot the difference 😆

> These series offer flexibility: use `analysis3` for stability, or `analysis3-edge` for the latest updates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These series offer flexibility: use `conda/analysis3` for stability, or `conda/analysis3-edge` for the latest updates.
```

### Load a specific environment version

> The `xp65` `conda/analysis3` environment takes a versioning approach, where users can specify a particular month when loading the modules. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `xp65` `conda/analysis3` environment follows the versioning format `conda/analysis3-YY-MM`, where `YY` represents the last two digits of the release year and `MM` indicates the release month.
```

> 1. **Command line and PBS**  
> If you would like to specify a particular version, you should call it explicitly. E.g. to load the April 2025 environment, specify `conda/analysis3-25.04`. If you do not specify a version, (e.g. using `conda/analysis3` rather than `conda/analysis3-YY.MM`), the latest environment version (the current month) will be loaded. 
> 2. **ARE**  
> When launching an ARE session, you need only include `conda/analysis3`. If you would like to specify a particular environment version, you can do so for each notebook by switching kernels inside the ARE instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use a particular version by explicitly specifying its release year and month (e.g., to load the April 2025 environment, specify `conda/analysis3-25.04`).<br>
If you do not specify a version (e.g. using `conda/analysis3` rather than `conda/analysis3-YY.MM`) the latest environment version will be loaded.

!!! tip
    The same version naming structure can be applied to the `conda/analysis3-edge` environment.
```

Author: Your suggestion indicates to remove the text about ARE. I think this is important information for users to know (that they don't need to specify the version when launching ARE).

Do you have a suggestion of where to put that information instead? (Or maybe I missed it earlier?)

Reviewer 2: That's true. Maybe it could be something like:

```suggestion
### Manual load and PBS
When [manually loading the environment](#manually-load-the-environment) or [within a PBS job](#use-the-environment-within-a-pbs-job), you can load a particular version by explicitly specifying its release year and month (e.g., to load the April 2025 environment, specify `conda/analysis3-25.04`).<br>
If you do not specify a version (e.g. using `conda/analysis3` rather than `conda/analysis3-YY.MM`) the latest environment version will be loaded.<br>
The same version naming structure can be applied to the `conda/analysis3-edge` environment.

### ARE Jupyterlab session
When launching an [ARE Jupyterlab session](#are-jupyterlab), simply include `conda/analysis3` without specifying a version. You can then select the desired environment version within each Jupyter notebook by switching kernels.
```

!!! tip
    If you only want to update your workflows from the previous `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment, refer to [Update your workflows](#update-your-workflows).

### Manually load the environment
  For each new session within a _Gadi_ login node or [ARE VDI](/getting_started/are/#vdi) terminal, run:
  ```
  module use /g/data/xp65/public/modules
  module load conda/analysis3
  ```
### Use the environment within a PBS job
In a [PBS job submission script](https://opus.nci.org.au/spaces/Help/pages/90308778/0.+Welcome+to+Gadi#id-0.WelcometoGadi-SubmissionScriptExample), add `gdata/xp65` to your storage flag:
```
#PBS -l storage=gdata/xp65
```
!!! tip
    Multiple storage projects are separated by a plus (`+`): 
    ```
    #PBS -l storage=scratch/tm70+gdata/xp65
    ```

### Use the environment within ARE
<div class="tabLabels" label="are">
    <button id="are-vdi">ARE VDI</button>
    <button id="are-jupyterlab">ARE JupyterLab</button>
</div>
<div tabcontentfor='are-vdi' markdown>
When launching an [ARE VDI](/getting_started/are/#vdi) instance:

1. Under "Storage", add  `gdata/xp65`. If you have other storage locations, use a plus sign (`+`) (e.g., `+gdata/xp65`).
</div>

> <div tabcontentfor='are-jupyter' markdown>

Author: Oh shoot, I actually updated this in my local version but then copied something else over and overwrote it... Thanks!

{% set release_notes = "https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-nri-analysis3-conda-environments-new-release-announcement/4377" %}

<div class="text-card-group" markdown>
[:notepad_spiral:{: class="twemoji icon-before-text"} Release notes]({{release_notes}}){: class="text-card"}
</div>

# _conda/analysis3_ Python Environment

!!! danger 
    All users are advised to [update their workflows](#update-workflows) to replace the `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment with the `xp65` `conda/analysis3` environment **by 30 May 2025**. After this date, the functionality of the `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment will not be guaranteed.

ACCESS-NRI now supports and maintains the `conda/analysis3` _Python_ environment, housed within the [xp65 NCI project](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/xp65/join). This environment includes _Python_ libraries commonly used for climate data processing and analysis, allowing users to run workflows on _Gadi_ without having to manage package installations themselves. This is the continuation of the environment formerly maintained by CLEX within the `hh5` NCI project.

## How to use the _xp65_ _conda/analysis3_ environment

>  There are 3 main ways to use the `conda/analysis3` environment:  
> 1. [Command line (manually load the environment)](#manually-load-the-environment) 
> 2. [PBS job](#use-the-environment-within-a-pbs-job)
> 3. [ARE](#use-the-environment-within-are)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 There are 3 main ways to use the `conda/analysis3` environment:
 
1. [From the command line](#manually-load-the-environment) 
2. [In a PBS job](#use-the-environment-within-a-pbs-job)
3. [In an ARE session](#use-the-environment-within-are)
```

Author: I'd prefer to leave out the extra words, and just get straight to the point (e.g. "PBS job" instead of "In a PBS job").

!!! tip

>     If you only want to update your workflows from the previous `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment, refer to [Update your workflows](#update-your-workflows) below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If you only want to update your workflows from the previous `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment, refer to [Update your workflows](#update-your-workflows).
```

Author: Is there a particular reason you object to "below"? I just wanted to indicate that we are linking to another place on the same webpage, rather than a different site.

Reviewer 2: No hard objection, feel free to keep it. 
My main point is that for me is redundant, because people who click on the link would see the page scrolling to the specific point.
And for external links (that go to a different site) they get rendered with a little icon at the top right (doesn't currently work for PR previews, but the fix is already in a branch that will soon be merged. You can still see it often in th main website)

### Manually load the environment
  For each new session within a _Gadi_ login node or [ARE VDI](/getting_started/are/#vdi) terminal, run:
  ```
  module use /g/data/xp65/public/modules
  module load conda/analysis3
  ```

!!! tip
    If you previously loaded the `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment within your `.bashrc` or `.bash_profile` files, we recommend that you **completely remove those lines**, as programmatically loading environments that way might lead to unforeseen interference with other processes on _Gadi_. We suggest instead that you [manually load the environment](#manually-load-the-environment).

### Use the environment within a PBS job
In a [PBS job submission script](https://opus.nci.org.au/spaces/Help/pages/90308778/0.+Welcome+to+Gadi#id-0.WelcometoGadi-SubmissionScriptExample), add `gdata/xp65` to your storage flag:
```
#PBS -l storage=gdata/xp65
```
!!! tip
    Multiple storage projects are separated by a plus (`+`): 
    ```
    #PBS -l storage=scratch/tm70+gdata/xp65
    ```

### Use the environment within ARE
<div class="tabLabels" label="are">
    <button id="are-vdi">ARE VDI</button>
    <button id="are-jupyterlab">ARE JupyterLab</button>
</div>

> When launching an <span tabcontentfor='are-vdi' markdown>[ARE VDI](/getting_started/are/#vdi)</span><span tabcontentfor='are-jupyter' markdown>[ARE JupyterLab](/getting_started/are/#jupyterlab)</span> instance:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When launching an <span tabcontentfor='are-vdi' markdown>[ARE VDI](/getting_started/are/#vdi)</span><span tabcontentfor='are-jupyterlab' markdown>[ARE JupyterLab](/getting_started/are/#jupyterlab)</span> instance:
```

Author: Fixed locally

1. Under "Storage", add  `gdata/xp65`. If you have other storage locations, use a plus sign (`+`) (e.g., `+gdata/xp65`).
<div tabcontentfor='are-jupyter' markdown>
2. Under [Advanced options](/getting_started/are/#advanced-options):
    - In "Module directories", add `/g/data/xp65/public/modules/`
    - In "Modules", add `conda/analysis3`
</div>

## How to switch from the _hh5_ to the _xp65_ _conda/analysis3_ environment  {: #update-workflows }
If you have workflows that use the `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment, follow the steps below to update them to use the `xp65` `conda/analysis3` environment instead:

> 1. If you have not already, **[request membership to the xp65 project](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/xp65/join)**
> 2. **Replace all instances of `hh5` with `xp65`**
> 3. **Make sure you are loading a correct version**<br>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

1. If you have not already, **[request membership to the xp65 project](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/xp65/join)**
2. **Replace all instances of `hh5` with `xp65`**
3. **Make sure you are loading a correct version**<br>
```
In markdown you need a blank line before a dotted or numbered list otherwise it will not be rendered properly

Author: Updated locally

   The  `xp65` `conda/analysis3` environment versioning might differ from the old `hh5` `conda/analysis3` one. Therefore, if you were loading a specific version (e.g., `conda/analysis3-23.10`), make sure to [specify a valid version](#load-a-specific-environment-version) for the `xp65` `conda/analysis3` environment.

## Advanced usage

### Two Series of Environments: _conda/analysis3_ and _conda/analysis3-edge_

There are two parallel series of environments:

- **_conda/analysis3_**<br>
    A stable environment designed for long-term usability with well-tested, reliable package versions.
- **_conda/analysis3-edge_**<br>
    A cutting-edge environment with the latest available packages, ideal for those needing the most up-to-date software and features.

These series offer flexibility: use `conda/analysis3` for stability, or `conda/analysis3-edge` for the latest updates.

### Load a specific environment version

The `xp65` `conda/analysis3` environment follows the versioning format `conda/analysis3-YY-MM`, where `YY` represents the last two digits of the release year and `MM` indicates the release month.

> - **Command line and PBS**  
> You can use a particular version by explicitly specifying its release year and month (e.g., to load the April 2025 environment, specify `conda/analysis3-25.04`). If you do not specify a version, (e.g. using `conda/analysis3` rather than `conda/analysis3-YY.MM`), the latest environment version (the current month) will be loaded. 
> - **ARE**  
> When launching an ARE session, you need only include `conda/analysis3`. If you would like to specify a particular environment version, you can do so for each notebook by switching kernels inside the ARE instance.
> 
> !!! tip
>     The same version naming structure can be applied to the `conda/analysis3-edge` environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Command line and PBS
When [manually loading the environment](#manually-load-the-environment) or [within a PBS job](#use-the-environment-within-a-pbs-job), you can load a particular version by explicitly specifying its release year and month (e.g., to load the April 2025 environment, specify `conda/analysis3-25.04`).<br>
If you do not specify a version (e.g., using `conda/analysis3`) the latest environment version will be loaded.<br>

### ARE Jupyterlab session
When launching an [ARE Jupyterlab session](#are-jupyterlab), simply include `conda/analysis3` without specifying a version. You can then select the desired environment version within each Jupyter notebook by switching kernels.

!!! tip 
    The same version naming and usage can be applied to the `conda/analysis3-edge` environment.
```

Author: Updated locally

# _conda/analysis3_ Python Environment

!!! danger
    All users are advised to [update their workflows](#update-workflows) to replace the `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment with the `xp65` `conda/analysis3` environment as soon as possible to ensure continued support and access to the latest features. The `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment is no longer actively maintained and, **after 30 May 2025**, the `hh5` project may be taken down without prior notice.
   

> ACCESS-NRI now supports and maintains the `conda/analysis3` _Python_ environment, housed within the [xp65 NCI project](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/xp65/join). This environment includes _Python_ libraries commonly used for climate data processing and analysis, allowing users to run workflows on _Gadi_ without having to manage package installations themselves. This is the continuation of the environment formerly maintained by CLEX within the `hh5` NCI project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ACCESS-NRI now supports and maintains the `conda/analysis3` _Python_ environment, housed within the [xp65 NCI project](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/xp65/join). This environment includes _Python_ libraries commonly used for climate data processing and analysis, allowing users to run workflows on _Gadi_ without having to manage package installations themselves. This is the continuation of the environments formerly maintained by CLEX within the `hh5` NCI project.
```

## How to use the _xp65_ _conda/analysis3_ environment
 There are 3 main ways to use the `conda/analysis3` environment:  

1. [Command line](#manually-load-the-environment) 
2. [PBS job](#use-the-environment-within-a-pbs-job)
3. [ARE](#use-the-environment-within-are)

!!! tip
    If you only want to update your workflows from the previous `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment, refer to [Update your workflows](#update-workflows) below.

> ### Manually load the environment from the command line  {: #manually-load-the-environment }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Manually load the environment {: #manually-load-the-environment }
```
With the addition of shell scripts, loading through the command line is not the only way here, so I would leave it more general.

>   For each new session within a _Gadi_ login node or [ARE VDI](/getting_started/are/#vdi) terminal, run:

Reviewer 2: Here I would also mention shell scripting:

```suggestion
  For each new session within a _Gadi_ login node, [ARE VDI](/getting_started/are/#vdi) terminal, or in a shell script, run:
```

  ```
  module use /g/data/xp65/public/modules
  module load conda/analysis3
  ```

!!! tip
    If you have previously added commands to load the `hh5` `conda/analysis3` environment within your `.bashrc` or `.bash_profile` file, we strongly recommend **completely removing those lines**, 
    as programmatically loading environments that way might lead to unexpected interference with other processes on _Gadi_.<br><br>
    A safer approach is to define a [Bash alias](https://tldp.org/LDP/abs/html/aliases.html#:~:text=A%20Bash%20alias%20is%20essentially,a%20ls%20%2Dl%20%7C%20more.) or shell function that runs your desired series of commands. 
    You can then manually invoke the alias whenever needed.<br>
    For example, you can add the following line to your `.bashrc` or `.bash_profile` file:
    ```sh
    alias analysis3='module use /g/data/xp65/public/modules && module load conda/analysis3'
    ```
    Then, within any session, you can simply run `analysis3` to load the environment.

### Use the environment within a PBS job  {: #use-the-environment-within-a-pbs-job }

> In a [PBS job submission script](https://opus.nci.org.au/spaces/Help/pages/90308778/0.+Welcome+to+Gadi#id-0.WelcometoGadi-SubmissionScriptExample) (including for usage with rose/cylc), in addition to adding the two `module use` and `module load` lines above, add `gdata/xp65` to your storage flag:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a [PBS job submission script](https://opus.nci.org.au/spaces/Help/pages/90308778/0.+Welcome+to+Gadi#id-0.WelcometoGadi-SubmissionScriptExample) (including usage within _rose/cylc_ workflows), in addition to adding the `module use` and `module load` lines above, add `gdata/xp65` to your storage flag:
```

The `xp65` `conda/analysis3` environment follows the versioning format `conda/analysis3-YY-MM`, where `YY` represents the last two digits of the release year and `MM` indicates the release month.

#### Command line and PBS 

> When [manually loading the environment from the command line](#manually-load-the-environment) or [within a PBS job](#use-the-environment-within-a-pbs-job), you can load a particular version by explicitly specifying its release year and month (e.g., to load the April 2025 environment, specify `conda/analysis3-25.04`).<br>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When [manually loading the environment](#manually-load-the-environment) or [within a PBS job](#use-the-environment-within-a-pbs-job), you can load a particular version by explicitly specifying its release year and month (e.g., to load the April 2025 environment, specify `conda/analysis3-25.04`).<br>
```

> If you do not specify a version (e.g. using `conda/analysis3` rather than `conda/analysis3-YY.MM`) the latest frozen (the previous month's) environment version will be loaded.<br>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you do not specify a version (e.g. using `conda/analysis3` rather than `conda/analysis3-YY.MM`) the latest (i.e., previous month's) frozen environment version will be loaded.<br>
```

!!! note 

>     For rose/cylc, it is not recommended to specify a particular version of the environment (i.e. use `conda/analysis3` and not `conda/analysis3-YY.MM`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    For _rose/cylc_ workflows, it is not recommended to specify a particular version of the environment (i.e. use `conda/analysis3` and not `conda/analysis3-YY.MM`).
```

#### ARE

> When launching an [ARE Jupyterlab session](#are-jupyterlab), you need only include `conda/analysis3`. If you would like to specify a particular environment version, you can do so for each notebook by switching kernels inside the ARE instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When launching an [ARE Jupyterlab session](#are-jupyterlab), you only need to include `conda/analysis3`. If you would like to specify a particular environment version, you can do so for each notebook by switching kernels inside the ARE instance.
```

This is minor, but I find this version clearer.
